.\"                                      Hey, EMACS: -*- nroff -*-
.\" First parameter, NAME, should be all caps
.\" Second parameter, SECTION, should be 1-8, maybe w/ subsection
.\" other parameters are allowed: see man(7), man(1)
.TH NGMULTIDEC 1 "2014-10-28"
.\" Please adjust this date whenever revising the manpage.
.\"
.\" Some roff macros, for reference:
.\" .nh        disable hyphenation
.\" .hy        enable hyphenation
.\" .ad l      left justify
.\" .ad b      justify to both left and right margins
.\" .nf        disable filling
.\" .fi        enable filling
.\" .br        insert line break
.\" .sp <n>    insert n+1 empty lines
.\" for manpage-specific macros, see man(7)
.SH NAME
ngmultidec \- make ngpice sub-circuit for coupled transmission lines
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B ngmultidec
[
.IR options ...
]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.I ngmultidec
writes an ngspice input file to standard output which describes a sub-circuit for coupled lines
using uncoupled simple lossy lines.
.LP
Each generated subcircuit models a 4-conductor transmission line with
the following parameters: length
.IR l ,
line capacitance
.IR c ,
line resistance
.IR r ,
line conductance
.IR g ,
inductive_coeff_of_coupling
.IR k ,
inter-line capacitance
.IR cm ,
length
.IR l .
Derived parameters are:
.IR lm ,
.IR ctot .
The values of
.IR l ,
.IR c ,
the model name, the number of conductors and the length of the line
must be specified.
.LP
It is important to note that the model is a simplified one - the
following assumptions are made: 1. The self-inductance l, the
self-capacitance ctot (note: not c), the series resistance r and the
parallel capacitance g are the same for all lines, and 2. Each line
is coupled only to the two lines adjacent to it, with the same
coupling parameters cm and lm.
The first assumption implies that edge effects have to be neglected.
The utility of these assumptions is
that they make the sL+R and sC+G matrices symmetric, tridiagonal and
Toeplitz, with useful consequences (see the paper referenced below).
.LP
It may be noted that a symmetric two-conductor line is
represented accurately by this model.
.LP
Standard C language scientific (exponent) notation may be used for options' numeric values.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BI \-o "subcircuit_name"
Set the subcircuit name
.TP
.BI \-l "line_inductance"
Set the line inductance.
.TP
.BI \-c "line_capacitance"
Set the line capacitance.
.TP
.BI \-r "line_resistance"
Set the line resistance.
.TP
.BI \-g "line_conductance"
Set the line conductance.
.TP
.BI \-k "inductive_coefficient_of_coupling"
Set the value of the inductive coefficient of coupling, whose
absolute value
.I k
must be less than 1.0.
.TP
.BI \-x "line-to-line-capacitance"
Set the line-to-line capacitance.
.TP
.BI \-L "length"
Set the length of the line.
.TP
.BI \-n "number"
Set the number of conductors.
.TP
.B \-u
Write a usage message to standard error.
.SH EXAMPLE
.RS
.B ngmultidec -n4 -l9e9 -c20e-12 -r5.3 -x5e12 -k0.7 -otest -L5.4 > test.cir
.RE
.SH SEE ALSO
.nf
.IR "Efficient Transient Simulation of Lossy Interconnect" ,
J.S. Roychowdhury and D.O. Pederson,
Proceedings of the Design Automation Conference,
pp. 740-745.
1991.
.B http://portal.acm.org/citation.cfm?doid=127601.127762
.fi
.sp
.IR ngnutmeg (1),
.IR ngproc2mod (1),
.IR ngsconvert (1),
.IR ngspice (1),
.IR nghelp (1).
